BASIC CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT ACT 75 OF 1997 (BCEA)

Section 6: Regulation of Working Time
(1) Every employer must regulate the working time of each employee—
(a) in accordance with the provisions of any Act governing occupational health and safety;
(b) with due regard to the health and safety of employees;
(c) with due regard to the Code of Good Practice on the Regulation of Working Time issued under section 87(1)(a); and
(d) with due regard to the family responsibilities of employees.

Section 9: Ordinary Hours of Work
(1) Subject to this Chapter, an employer may not require or permit an employee to work more than—
(a) 45 hours in any week; and
(b) nine hours in any day if the employee works for five days or fewer in a week; or
(c) eight hours in any day if the employee works on more than five days in a week.

Section 10: Overtime
(1) Subject to this Chapter, an employer may not require or permit an employee to work overtime except in accordance with an agreement.
(2) An employer may not require or permit an employee to work more than—
(a) three hours overtime a day; or
(b) 10 hours overtime a week.
(3) An employer must pay an employee at least one and one-half times the employee's wage for overtime worked.

Section 20: Annual Leave
(1) In this Chapter, 'leave cycle' means the period of 12 months' employment with the same employer immediately following—
(a) an employee's commencement of employment; or
(b) the completion of that employee's prior leave cycle.
(2) An employer must grant to an employee at least—
(a) 21 consecutive days' annual leave under full remuneration in respect of each annual leave cycle; or
(b) by agreement, one day of annual leave on full remuneration for every 17 days on which the employee worked or was entitled to be paid.

Section 22: Sick Leave
(1) In this Chapter, 'sick leave cycle' means the period of 36 months' employment with the same employer immediately following—
(a) an employee's commencement of employment; or
(b) the completion of that employee's prior sick leave cycle.
(2) During every sick leave cycle, an employee is entitled to an amount of paid sick leave equal to the number of days the employee would normally work during a period of six weeks.

Section 25: Maternity Leave
(1) An employee is entitled to at least four consecutive months' maternity leave.
(2) An employee may commence maternity leave—
(a) at any time from four weeks before the expected date of birth, unless otherwise agreed; or
(b) on a date from which a medical practitioner or a midwife certifies that it is necessary for the employee's health or that of her unborn child.

Section 27: Family Responsibility Leave
(1) This section applies to an employee—
(a) who has been in employment with an employer for longer than four months; and
(b) who works for at least four days a week for that employer.
(2) An employer must grant an employee, during each annual leave cycle, at the request of the employee, three days' paid leave, which the employee is entitled to take—
(a) when the employee's child is born;
(b) when the employee's child is sick; or
(c) in the event of the death of—
(i) the employee's spouse or life partner; or
(ii) the employee's parent, adoptive parent, grandparent, child, adopted child, grandchild or sibling.