LABOUR RELATIONS ACT 66 OF 1995 (LRA)

Section 1: Purpose of the Act
The purpose of this Act is to advance economic development, social justice, labour peace and the democratisation of the workplace by fulfilling the primary objects of this Act, which are—
(a) to give effect to and regulate the fundamental rights conferred by section 23 of the Constitution;
(b) to give effect to obligations incurred by the Republic as a member state of the International Labour Organisation;
(c) to provide a framework within which employees and their trade unions, employers and employers' organisations can—
(i) collectively bargain to determine wages, terms and conditions of employment and other matters of mutual interest; and
(ii) formulate industrial policy; and
(d) to promote—
(i) orderly collective bargaining;
(ii) collective bargaining at sectoral level;
(iii) employee participation in decision-making in the workplace; and
(iv) the effective resolution of labour disputes.

Section 4: Employees' Right to Freedom of Association
(1) Every employee has the right to participate in forming a trade union or federation of trade unions; and to join a trade union, subject to its constitution.

Section 185: Right Not to be Unfairly Dismissed or Subjected to Unfair Labour Practice
Every employee has the right not to be—
(a) unfairly dismissed; and
(b) subjected to unfair labour practice.

Section 186: Meaning of Dismissal and Unfair Labour Practice
(1) 'Dismissal' means that—
(a) an employer has terminated employment with or without notice;
(b) an employee reasonably expected the employer to renew a fixed term contract of employment on the same or similar terms but the employer offered to renew it on less favourable terms, or did not renew it;
(e) an employee terminated employment with or without notice because the employer made continued employment intolerable for the employee (constructive dismissal).
(2) 'Unfair labour practice' means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving—
(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
(b) the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee.

Section 188: Other Unfair Dismissals
(1) A dismissal that is not automatically unfair, is unfair if the employer fails to prove—
(a) that the reason for dismissal is a fair reason—
(i) related to the employee's conduct or capacity; or
(ii) based on the employer's operational requirements; and
(b) that the dismissal was effected in accordance with a fair procedure.

Schedule 8: Code of Good Practice: Dismissal
Item 1: Introduction
(1) This schedule deals with some of the key aspects of dismissals for reasons related to conduct and capacity. It is intentionally general. Each case is unique, and departures from the norms established by this Code may be justified in proper circumstances.
Item 4: Fair Procedure
(1) Normally, the employer should conduct an investigation to determine whether there are grounds for dismissal. This does not need to be a formal enquiry. The employer should notify the employee of the allegations using a form and language that the employee can reasonably understand. The employee should be allowed the opportunity to state a case in response to the allegations.